---
title: 'A World Apart'
taxonomy:
    category:
        - 'Creative Portfolio'
    tag:
        - Academic
---

Orhan Pamuk’s Ka bemoans his station in the world in the opening paragraphs of 2002’s Snow— the prodigal returning from over a decade abroad, Ka sees Turkey as a world that exists parallel to the European world he’d found during his stay in Germany. Ka identifies, quite deftly, that these two worlds may interact with one another at arm’s length, but they may not become one and same; that is, in Ka’s conception of the world, Islam and Christianity, East and West, Asia and Europe, cannot occupy the same space: they are fundamentally different. 

Sherman Alexie’s Absolutely True Diaries of a Part-Time Indian, however, sees a different barrier existing between a majority group and a minority group. Where Ka sees the increasingly-islamic Turkey of being unable to assimilate into the greater world, Alexie’s Junior sees the world as something that he will be able to eventually enter, with a plurality of his native culture in bargain. Therein lies the fundamental difference between Pamuk and Alexie: Pamuk sees the world apart from Islam, specifically Turkey, as being unwilling to assimilate and change to accommodate modern Turkey’s inclusion, while Alexie places the onus of change on the individual, or the minority group, in lieu of the majority group.

Ka’s journey back to Turkey is defined by a dichotomy between the public identity and the private identity, a dichotomy that functions as a synecdoche for the greater tension between the Islamic world and the secular West. To the people who he meets while traveling through Turkey to the small village of Kars, Ka is a journalist investigating a rash of suicides among young women. He’s analytical, driven by facts, curious and inquisitive. In contrast to this facade, Ka’s private motivations for returning home are much simpler: he wants to reconnect with an old flame from his youth, a woman who has recently become single and available again. Ipek, in a greater scale, is not just a woman with whom Ka wants to reconnect, but a gateway for Ka to return to the secular Turkey that dominated his childhood.

Where Ka is looking for a gateway back to a world he knew in his youth, Junior is looking for a way to enter the world that will define his adolescence and adulthood. This crucial difference, manifested not only by the ages of the two characters but by their positions in life, can be understood as a thematic choice, a way to point a path leading forwards. Junior is at the beginning of his path, while Ka is nearing the end of his.
	
The story of Snow, in particular, subverts a reader’s expectations. Early in the novel, the pretext for the current events in the story are laid bare: girls all throughout this region of Turkey are killing themselves in copycat suicides. Ka is traveling to Kars to investigate this phenomena, report on it, and perhaps better understand why female suicide has reached such a prevalence. It’s a very simple, straightforward justification for Ka, though early in the novel he does question why he’s traveling to Kars specifically instead of the much larger Batman.

As the novel progresses, though, readers are made privy to Ka and his secrets. He doesn’t care much at all for the cover story regarding his trip; in fact, he seems almost flippant about the entire thing, and is much more concerned with the true impetus for his sojourn: a lost love from his youth, and a chance to rekindle with that flame. Early in the novel, Ka opines and speaks of his nature when he says determines that he “...can fall in love with a woman only if he knows next to nothing about her.” (Pamuk, 50) It is this romantic nature that dooms Ka as he finds ways to let Ipek, and his past, into his life in the present.

The question of history is central to Snow. In much the same way that humans are judged for their actions in the past, never able to outrun the effects of our choices, so too is Turkey itself. Although his adoration of Ipek is the initial reason for Ka’s journey, he soon finds himself embroiled in a conflict that highlights tension: Asian vs. European secular vs. religious, old vs. young. In many ways, the tension mirrors the tension inside of him, his reluctance to accept his age and the events of his past, and the difficulties he finds reintegrating into Turkish society. Pamuk is careful not to espouse a particular political position in a very political novel; rather, he lets Ka grow, and allows readers an insight into the many faceted life of the modern Turk, and what that concept of ‘Modern’ and even ‘Turk’ may or may not mean.

The ending of the novel, and the narrative structure that Pamuk engages, is very particular and serves a very clear purpose. The distraught Ka leaves Turkey for a final time, and again loses his youth and the object of his affections. In spite of the novel’s events and his advances, Ipek chooses to remain in Turkey and becomes party to a public suicide, a suicide that mirrors the death of the hopes and dreams of the ‘young’ Turkey.

This ending is a complete inversion of what Alexie creates with Junior and his story. Throughout Absolutely True Diaries…, Junior is portrayed as a person who is figuring things out, coming to grips with his life. He learns how to build friendships that will last a lifetime, and he learns what family means, and the flawed nature of every parent. Most importantly, though, Junior finds concrete answers to these questions: he is able to reach a point where he quite definitively understands what it is he wants to do, where he wants to be, and what that means for him and his family. This is in contrast to Ka, who is never given a clear resolution to his circumstances, nor his nation to its larger questions. 

The central relationships of each novel mirror the greater questions of future vs. past. Ka’s greatest confidant and his reason for being, Ipek, is a fixture of his past; the falling out of his youth drove him to leave the country and launched his professional career. In coming back to Turkey and Ipek, specifically, Ka is looking for a way to reconsider the choices he’s made in his life. He is looking for the correct answer, the correct way to be Turkish and to exist in the modern world. Junior and his best friend Rowdy, though, are defined by their future: they are close friends in youth, and one can assume that they will remain close friends throughout their lives. The future, though, is unwritten: Alexie is creating a story of possibility, a way to move to somewhere better for both Junior and Rowdy. 

It is this distinction between future and past that is at the heart of the question of identity. Junior sees the world for what it may be, and constructs his identity in the ‘correct’ fashion to reach this point. The identity that Junior finds is quintessentially America: nationalistic, not ethnic or geographic. The question of whether Junior is native or American is answered implicitly in the novel: Junior is both. In his youth, he is a native when he interacts with his family and Rowdy, but another American during school, especially when he changes districts. Ka, on the other hand, fails to synthesise an identity that is both Turkish and European: the question of what qualities are the ‘correct’ ones to construct an identity is at the heart of Snow, and Ka’s ultimate goal is to create an identity that works both privately and publicly, the identity of a Turk. 

The message one can take from both of these novels is that the past is the past: although it sounds trite, we are defined by the actions we take days, months, or even years ago. Ka cannot escape his choices, his falling out with Ipek, his flight to Germany, nor the choices he makes in the novel concerning Turkish nationalism. Ipek, too, is defined by the choices that she makes, and by staying in Turkey she ties her fate to the political future of the country, a future that is tenuous and imbalanced at best.	

Junior, on the other hand, has his own past to deal with, but instead of running from it or attempting to change it, he accepts it. He and his family accept their native American heritage, and compartmentalize that with their increasingly American public persona. Through this act of compartmentalization, Junior and his family manage to keep their native heritage intact, while coming to find a new place in the modern world. By the end of the novel, Junior has found a way to reconcile his greater ethnic past, and his personal past with his family life and his parents, with the future that he wants for himself. He does not run and hide from his father’s alcoholism, for example, but allows it to exist while refusing to let it define him. This is the crucial mistake that Ka makes: he allows his past, particularly his time spent in Germany and his relationship with Ipek, spell his own demise and prevent him from finding the future he’s always wanted.

Ka’s demise points one to the idea of ‘correct’ness, and the ‘right’ way to construct an identity. By trying to mold both public and private identity, Pamuk’s Ka is undone, and unable to exist in a world defined by the tension between competing factions. The moral to the reader is that we must keep our private and public lives separate, and allow them to coexist in harmony to function in the world; choosing one to subvert the other is a choice that will ultimately doom a person, just as it doomed Ka and destroyed his hopes and dreams of a quiet life with Ipek. 
